README.md, before:

# meta-xt-rcar-gen5 #

This repository contains Renesas R-Car Gen5 VDK specific Yocto layers for
Xen Troops distro. Some layers in this repository are product-independent.
They provide common facilities that may be used by any xt-based product
that runs on Renesas Gen5-based platforms.

Those layers *may* be added and used manually, but they were written
with [Moulin](https://moulin.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) build system,
as Moulin-based project files provide correct entries in local.conf

# Status

This is initial release, that supports running of 2 separate Xen domains - thin
Dom0 and driver domain DomD. It is based on following projects:
- U-Boot 2022.01
- Dom0 Linux 5.10.41
- DomD Linux 5.10.147
- Xen 4.19.0

# External dependencies

This product is based on Synopsys VDK releases and Synopsys Virtualizer software.
Currently it is expected that user has and will run it with Synopsys Virtualizer
Runtime U-2023.03-SP2 and Synopsys VDK release 3.5.1 (with changes described in
"VDK configuration" section of EPAM release notes).

# Building

## Requirements

1. Ubuntu 18.0+ or any other Linux distribution which is supported by Poky/OE
2. Development packages for Yocto. Refer to [Yocto
   manual](https://docs.yoctoproject.org/brief-yoctoprojectqs/index.html#build-host-packages).
3. You need `Moulin` of version 0.15 or newer installed in your
   PC. Recommended way is to install it for your user only: `pip3
   install --user git+https://github.com/xen-troops/moulin`. Make sure
   that your `PATH` environment variable includes
   `${HOME}/.local/bin`.
4. Due to complex nature of this product and a lot of dependencies, it is
   strongly recommended to install this long list of packages, used on a
   different stages of the build:
```
apt-get update && apt-get install -y apt-utils cpio python python3 python3-pip \
python3-pexpect xz-utils debianutils iputils-ping python3-jinja2 pylint3 vim \
locales devscripts debhelper gawk wget diffstat texinfo chrpath socat \
libsdl1.2-dev python-crypto checkpolicy python3-git python3-github bzr pigz m4 \
lftp openjdk-8-jdk git-core rsync gnupg flex bison gperf build-essential zip \
curl zlib1g-dev gcc-multilib g++-multilib libc6-dev-i386 lib32ncurses5-dev \
x11proto-core-dev libx11-dev lib32z1-dev ccache libgl1-mesa-dev libxml2-utils \
xsltproc unzip bc ninja-build simg2img lz4 zstd python3-pyelftools \
python3-crypto libncurses5 libssl-dev udev sudo expect graphviz adb aapt \
libgtk-3-dev simg2img protobuf-compiler dosfstools python3-pygit2 && \
apt-get install --reinstall -y ca-certificates && \
pip3 install pycryptodomex west protobuf grpcio-tools
```

## Build yaml file

Currently this project does not have dedicated repository, so recepies and build
yaml are shared alongside with release binaries in release archieve and named
`prod-devel-rcar-gen5-vdk.yaml`. To initiate build you need to have only this
file in target build directory:

```
$ mkdir "your builds dir"/rcar-gen5-vdk-build/
$ cp "unpacked release archive dir"/meta-xt-prod-devel-rcar-gen5-vdk/prod-devel-rcar-gen5-vdk.yaml "your builds dir"/rcar-gen5-vdk-build/
```

Also, due to sharing this project as archive instead of remote repository, you
need to provide local path for it inside `prod-devel-rcar-gen5-vdk.yaml` before
build. To do this, please find following line and substitute it with location
from unpacked release archive:

Change:
```
    - type: git
      url: <local repo full path>
      rev: master
```

To:

```
    - type: git
      url: /"unpacked release archive dir"/meta-xt-prod-devel-rcar-gen5-vdk/
      rev: master
```

## Building

After previous steps you can start building. Moulin is used to generate Ninja build
file, just run following command in directory created in previous section:

```
$ moulin prod-devel-rcar-gen5-vdk.yaml
```

Moulin will generate `build.ninja` file. After that run following command to
build the target images:

```
$ ninja boot_artifacts virtio.img
```

This will take some time and disk space as it builds 2 separate Yocto images.

## Android as the guest

This option is in active development and has very limited functionality.

In order to build DomA you need to install Google's `repo` tool.
Please follow the instruction to install `repo`
https://source.android.com/docs/setup/start/requirements#repo

It is possible to build Android as the guest domain DomA, providing
`--ENABLE_ANDROID yes` option for the moulin. This will result in the
fetching and building of the AOSP 14. Resulting product can run on VDK
with very limited functionality as for now.

Important note!
Build of the DomA with AOSP requires 400-500 GB of the free space and
5-10 hours of fetching and compilation, depending on your internet speed and
workstation. It is strongly recommended to use SSD drive for the build.

# Booting

After building stage output files will appear in your build directory (where
you previously placed `prod-devel-rcar-gen5-vdk.yaml`) - `virtio.img` and
`artifacts` directory with `X5H-boot-artifacts.tar.bz` archive.

To boot them you need to have Virtualizer U-boot config (`UBoot_5_10_41.vpcfg`)
from EPAM release (refer to "External dependencies" section of these document
and "VDK configuration" section of EPAM release notes). This file contains
pathes to target images and addresses that should be used for loading.

To run your images, please, open `UBoot_5_10_41.vpcfg` via Virtualizer and:
- substitute original image pathes with unpacked from `X5H-boot-artifacts.tar.bz`
  Dom0 `Image` and `uInitramfs` are located in `yocto/build-dom0/tmp/deploy/images`
  Xen device tree (`r8a78000-X5H-xen.dtb`), Xen image (`xen-x5h.uImage`),
  U-boot image (`u-boot.bin`) and Xenpolicy (`xenpolicy-4.19-unstable`) are
  located in `yocto/build-domd/tmp/deploy/images` of `X5H-boot-artifacts.tar.bz`
  unpacked archive
- change original `virtio.img` in `VIRTIO` sections of Images tab to `virtio.img`
  from build folder

After this you can run simulation with you own images.

Commit message:

Add docker container for the build
- add the Docker container for the build of this product;
- provide the corresponding instruction for the setting
  and usage of the container;
- update README.md with container related info.

Signed-off-by: Ruslan Shymkevych <ruslan_shymkevych@epam.com>
Reviewed-by: Leonid Komarianskyi <leonid_komarianskyi@epam.com>
Reviewed-by: Dmytro Firsov <dmytro_firsov@epam.com>

README.md, after:

# meta-xt-rcar-gen5 #

This repository contains Renesas R-Car Gen5 VDK specific Yocto layers for
Xen Troops distro. Some layers in this repository are product-independent.
They provide common facilities that may be used by any xt-based product
that runs on Renesas Gen5-based platforms.

Those layers *may* be added and used manually, but they were written
with [Moulin](https://moulin.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) build system,
as Moulin-based project files provide correct entries in local.conf

# Status

This is initial release, that supports running of 2 separate Xen domains - thin
Dom0 and driver domain DomD. It is based on following projects:
- U-Boot 2022.01
- Dom0 Linux 5.10.41
- DomD Linux 5.10.147
- Xen 4.19.0

# External dependencies

This product is based on Synopsys VDK releases and Synopsys Virtualizer software.
Currently it is expected that user has and will run it with Synopsys Virtualizer
Runtime U-2023.03-SP2 and Synopsys VDK release 3.5.1 (with changes described in
"VDK configuration" section of EPAM release notes).

# Building

## Build inside the docker container

This option is strongly recommended due to the long list of packages that have
to be installed on the host due to the complex nature of the product.
In order to have a reproducible and clean environment we urge you to use the
Docker container, provided in the `doc/` directory.
Please see the corresponding [instruction](doc/Docker.md).

## Requirements for the build without the container

1. Ubuntu 18.0+ or any other Linux distribution which is supported by Poky/OE
2. Development packages for Yocto. Refer to [Yocto
   manual](https://docs.yoctoproject.org/brief-yoctoprojectqs/index.html#build-host-packages).
3. You need `Moulin` of version 0.15 or newer installed in your
   PC. Recommended way is to install it for your user only: `pip3
   install --user git+https://github.com/xen-troops/moulin`. Make sure
   that your `PATH` environment variable includes
   `${HOME}/.local/bin`.
4. Due to complex nature of this product and a lot of dependencies, it is
   strongly recommended to install this long list of packages, used on a
   different stages of the build:
```
apt-get update && apt-get install -y apt-utils cpio python python3 python3-pip \
python3-pexpect xz-utils debianutils iputils-ping python3-jinja2 pylint3 vim \
locales devscripts debhelper gawk wget diffstat texinfo chrpath socat \
libsdl1.2-dev python-crypto checkpolicy python3-git python3-github bzr pigz m4 \
lftp openjdk-8-jdk git-core rsync gnupg flex bison gperf build-essential zip \
curl zlib1g-dev gcc-multilib g++-multilib libc6-dev-i386 lib32ncurses5-dev \
x11proto-core-dev libx11-dev lib32z1-dev ccache libgl1-mesa-dev libxml2-utils \
xsltproc unzip bc ninja-build simg2img lz4 zstd python3-pyelftools \
python3-crypto libncurses5 libssl-dev udev sudo expect graphviz adb aapt \
libgtk-3-dev simg2img protobuf-compiler dosfstools python3-pygit2 && \
apt-get install --reinstall -y ca-certificates && \
pip3 install pycryptodomex west protobuf grpcio-tools
```

## Build yaml file

Currently this project does not have dedicated repository, so recepies and build
yaml are shared alongside with release binaries in release archieve and named
`prod-devel-rcar-gen5-vdk.yaml`. To initiate build you need to have only this
file in target build directory:

```
$ mkdir "your builds dir"/rcar-gen5-vdk-build/
$ cp "unpacked release archive dir"/meta-xt-prod-devel-rcar-gen5-vdk/prod-devel-rcar-gen5-vdk.yaml "your builds dir"/rcar-gen5-vdk-build/
```

Also, due to sharing this project as archive instead of remote repository, you
need to provide local path for it inside `prod-devel-rcar-gen5-vdk.yaml` before
build. To do this, please find following line and substitute it with location
from unpacked release archive:

Change:
```
    - type: git
      url: <local repo full path>
      rev: master
```

To:

```
    - type: git
      url: /"unpacked release archive dir"/meta-xt-prod-devel-rcar-gen5-vdk/
      rev: master
```

## Building

After previous steps you can start building. Moulin is used to generate Ninja build
file, just run following command in directory created in previous section:

```
$ moulin prod-devel-rcar-gen5-vdk.yaml
```

Moulin will generate `build.ninja` file. After that run following command to
build the target images:

```
$ ninja boot_artifacts virtio.img
```

This will take some time and disk space as it builds 2 separate Yocto images.

## Android as the guest

This option is in active development and has very limited functionality.

If you build DomA without the Docker container, you need to install
Google's `repo` tool.
Please follow the instruction to install `repo`
https://source.android.com/docs/setup/start/requirements#repo

It is possible to build Android as the guest domain DomA, providing
`--ENABLE_ANDROID yes` option for the moulin. This will result in the
fetching and building of the AOSP 14. Resulting product can run on VDK
with very limited functionality as for now.

Important note!
Build of the DomA with AOSP requires 400-500 GB of the free space and
5-10 hours of fetching and compilation, depending on your internet speed and
workstation. It is strongly recommended to use SSD drive for the build.

# Booting

After building stage output files will appear in your build directory (where
you previously placed `prod-devel-rcar-gen5-vdk.yaml`) - `virtio.img` and
`artifacts` directory with `X5H-boot-artifacts.tar.bz` archive.

To boot them you need to have Virtualizer U-boot config (`UBoot_5_10_41.vpcfg`)
from EPAM release (refer to "External dependencies" section of these document
and "VDK configuration" section of EPAM release notes). This file contains
pathes to target images and addresses that should be used for loading.

To run your images, please, open `UBoot_5_10_41.vpcfg` via Virtualizer and:
- substitute original image pathes with unpacked from `X5H-boot-artifacts.tar.bz`
  Dom0 `Image` and `uInitramfs` are located in `yocto/build-dom0/tmp/deploy/images`
  Xen device tree (`r8a78000-X5H-xen.dtb`), Xen image (`xen-x5h.uImage`),
  U-boot image (`u-boot.bin`) and Xenpolicy (`xenpolicy-4.19-unstable`) are
  located in `yocto/build-domd/tmp/deploy/images` of `X5H-boot-artifacts.tar.bz`
  unpacked archive
- change original `virtio.img` in `VIRTIO` sections of Images tab to `virtio.img`
  from build folder

After this you can run simulation with you own images.
